# Common people are not the enemy. Greed and selfishness are.

Speaking of the United States, there is something deeply wrong, and that
knowledge is in the public consciousness at this point. People are sad,
scared, exhausted, and desperate. To show those feelings, however, is to
be vulnerable and to admit moments of weakness and uncertainty. To
acknowledge them is to start the process of confronting them. It can
seem easier not to do those things. But is it really easier? Is it not
worse to live that way, sedating ourselves and avoiding change--the
change that we are desperate for--and the real growth that is needed to
overcome our problems?

Look at the strife in this country, and ask, "Who stands to gain from
this?" It is not the average person. While we are at each other's
throats, this machine, this system, is functioning as it was designed
to, and becoming all the more efficient at it. The rich buy a new
vacation home while housing becomes unaffordable for many. They get
purely cosmetic surgeries while the rest of us worry how to pay our
healthcare bills. Power is robbed from those that need it more than
ever, and given to the powerful. The more we rage against one another,
the more we miss what is really happening here. Divide and conquer, yes?
We are the divided and we are the conquered, for as long as we allow it.

Corporations run this country. Corporations buy politicians, and those
politicians sell us the ideas and implement the changes the corporations
want them to. A politician that receives most of their funding from a
large coal or oil company is likely to always strike down renewable
energy, even if it is in the best interest of the majority, even if
fossil fuels are killing our planet and polluting the air we breathe.
Their principles and actions are auctioned out to the highest
bidder.

Please, stop tearing other people down. That is wasted energy and only
makes things worse. If we all keep each other down like crabs in a
bucket, we can never rise up out of this. Is it any wonder people feel
like they cannot trust each other anymore, when this is the way we treat
each other? We are social creatures. Strength lies in unity, not division.

Join me in resisting this machine. Love, help, and be kind to others and
to yourself. Foster new skills and become proficient in them. Learn
how to cultivate equanimity in the middle of this turbulent storm.
These are the seeds of revolution and change. Revolution and change
start within. Do not pour from an empty cup and wonder why the world
thirsts. Fill it, and then pour.

The process of mending societal problems and ills is a nuanced topic,
and one that has no easy answer. Perhaps wishing for compassion after
mentioning some of the grave injustices of society sounds idealistic, or
even naive, but it is important all the same. Trying to change society
for the better is a fool's errand if we have not first changed ourselves
for the better. Otherwise, we are more likely than not to be part of the
problem. We are part of the society we seek to change.

## Books

Here are some books that have helped me. I hope they may be useful
in that journey.

- *Mindfulness in Plain English* by Henepola Gunaratana. Mindfulness
  and meditation have changed my life for the better, and not a minute
  engaging with them has been wasted.

- *The Fate of Empires and Search for Survival* by John Glubb. John
  contextualizes the history of the United States and its gradual
  decline.

- *Permanent Record* by Edward Snowden. It illustrates the state of
  online privacy and mass surveillance in the form of a memoir.

- *Nineteen Eighty-Four* by George Orwell. A warning in the form of
  dystopian fiction.
