# Why a passion for technical subjects can be lonely

## Preface

I like to learn and teach. The same enthusiasm a cat exhibits while
unraveling a ball of yarn is how I feel about developing new insights
and sharing them with others.

However, I've noticed my passions for programming, cybersecurity, and
really anything to do with
[hacking](http://www.catb.org/jargon/html/H/hacker.html),[^1] are
difficult to relay to others effectively, and I think I've figured out
why. To explain my reasoning, let's examine one of my other passions
first: music.

[^1]: As the document mentions, the term 'hacker' is best when bestowed
      by others. I don't call myself a hacker for the same reason one
      wouldn't walk into a monastery and claim to be an arahant.

## Music is a universal passion

As a kid, I didn't really know how to relate to people (I still struggle
with that). The way I talked and conducted myself was foreign. I was an
outsider, at least until I started playing music. That seemed to draw
interest from others. People got curious and started talking to me more
often. Using that window of opportunity and what I learned from
observing others, I started to make friends.

So why did music make a difference in my case? My hypothesis is that it
comes down to a basic quality of music: music engages the senses. While
it's true that a background in music can foster a deeper sense of
understanding and appreciation, it's far from required. Similarly, a
good chef is adored by many, even those who don't know how to cook,
because they can taste and enjoy the food.

## Tech is not a universal passion

In comparison, writing software seems disembodied. There isn't an easily
accessible, built-in sensory experience to bridge the gap in knowledge
between two or more people as there is with music and cooking.

Also, one has to consider the relationship most people have with
technology. Some people regard computers and digital tasks similarly to
hammers and nails. That is to say, understanding the nature of the means
(how to best use the hammer/computer) often isn't prioritized as much as
achieving the ends (a nail driven into an object/a completed digital
task).

## Ways to approach/deal with this predicament

It can be difficult to fruitfully share a passion if it's
sufficiently complex, so here are several observations that I hope
others may find helpful.

- Remember the 'show' in show and tell. That is to say, demo when possible so
  that the listener can see things in action. Presentation can be
  just as important as content.

- Good teachers garner enough interest in the beginning to get students
  over the initial hurdle of not knowing enough about the subject
  being taught to want to know more about it. This early stage of
  eliciting curiosity seems to be critical, like what a spark is to
  fire. Getting a fire started or put out is harder than keeping
  something on fire, after all, and curiosity is similar.

- It's easier to be passionate with someone that already shares the
  same interest than it is to instill passion in someone new to it.

- If few people express interest in an endeavor or passion, that
  doesn't necessarily mean it lacks in substance. One only needs to look
  at heliocentricism and the Copernican Revolution to see that even blatant
  opposition doesn't lessen the worth of an idea.

- A place to write thoughts down can be helpful. Reading one's own words
  can be a way of giving oneself someone to listen.
