# FLOSS OS recommendations

## Generate recommendations from a quiz

Check out [LibreHunt](https://librehunt.org/) if you want something more
hands-on. LibreHunt does a good job of explaining the merits of FLOSS
and suggests Linux distributions based on how you answer its
questionnaire.

## My recommendations

First assess what you want and need in an OS. Do you want to maintain
a similar workflow or do you want to learn a more minimal way of doing
things?

### Maintaining a similar workflow

[![Screenshot of Linux Mint 20 "Ulyana" Cinnamon
Edition.](/images/cinnamon-thumb.png "Look at all those buttons. You can probably click them or something.")](/images/cinnamon-full.png)

Try [Linux Mint](https://www.linuxmint.com/download.php), specifically
the Cinnamon Edition. I believe in this OS enough that a USB flash drive
with Linux Mint is always on my person in case someone wants me to set
it up for them (perhaps I should have a utility belt with USB drives
strapped to it; each drive would be flashed with a different OS).

Linux Mint provides a familiar interface and full-featured applications
so the user can hit the ground running. The developers dedicate a lot of
time to make the system intuitive without a sacrifice in customizability
and I really appreciate that approach.

### Trying something more minimal

[![The OpenBSD logo with the mascot, Puffy the pufferfish, above it.](/images/openbsd-logo.png "Puffy is one of my favorite mascots.")](/images/openbsd-logo.png)

See ['Why
OpenBSD?'](/why-openbsd.html) for more details.

## Other devices you can liberate

### Smartphone

Use a privacy respecting OS for your mobile device if you can.
[GrapheneOS](https://grapheneos.org/) is what I use, although
[LineageOS](https://www.lineageos.org/) supports a wider range of
hardware.

### Router

Your router is a computer too. Proprietary consumer firmware isn't very
capable, nor is it secure. DD-WRT, OpenWRT, pfSense, and OpenBSD are all
much better options. If you decide to flash firmware onto a consumer
router, use Ethernet and take the appropriate precautions.

Check out [Building an OpenBSD router](/openbsd-router.html) for more
information on how I approach it.
